Dr. Katherine Nelson, welcome to Talk Pythonry. Awesome to have you here.
Thank you. Thank you.
So excited to talk about notebooks
and production and all these things. It's been fantastic.
Yeah, it's great to be here. Thank you for inviting me on the show. I'm a big fan of the podcast.
Oh, thank you so much.
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm happy to have you on the show. I really am a fan of helping data scientists move beyond just the playing around with the data science tools.
And by playing around, I mean like exploring data or building stuff just for yourself.
I don't know how many people know.
I'm going to talk about it a little bit, but not very much.
My very first programming job was writing software in C++ of all languages for a scientific research lab and company.
And so I would talk
to a lot of scientists and cognitive scientists mostly who would be working in MATLAB.
And
they'd go,
here's what I have in MATLAB.
make that a C++ program that integrates with this other thing
or implement this algorithm in this other tool or whatever.
And it was always an amazing experience,
but also like, oh, if it was just written a little bit better,
you could iterate on this a lot more.
You could experiment with this a lot more.
You could try this in different situations
instead of just this, it wasn't a notebook at the time,
but the MATLAB, whatever those things are called, those projects,
They're similar in style to that, I think.
Yeah, so I've actually been on a similar journey
because before I was a data scientist, I was a geologist.
And my first programming experience was in MATLAB.
And
I've taken that journey.
But it was thanks to a really nice conversation I had early in my career.
I was the only data scientist working on the team of developers, designers, and so on.
And I had a conversation with a teammate when I was like, do I really need to learn all this stuff?
I can write code that gets the job done.
But he was like,
if you write better code, you can do more data science faster.
And that comment really started me on the journey I've taken towards writing my book,
towards feeling that I wanted to help data scientists write better code.
Yeah.
It's interesting to live it, right?
Not
just
read about, oh, we should be probably using Git or whatever,
but
be
down in it.
It sounds like you've come from this non-rigorous background
and
working more
towards that.
You've probably seen and
experienced a
lot of things like, oh, now I see why people care about source control or now I see why
people care
about single responsibility functions or whatever.
It's a different type of rigor.
So there's the scientific rigor
where you're
going through that process and testing your hypothesis, but you're not necessarily writing scalable codes to do that.
The scientific rigor is there.
But then there's the software principles that are a different type of standardization.
Yeah, absolutely.
All right, well, before we dive into moving from exploratory data to production data science and scaling notebooks,
give us a quick bit of background on yourself.
Yeah, so I
have been in, I was a data scientist for about 10 years.
2015 and I've always had a strong focus on the machine learning side of things.
Until 2023, I worked for SAP Concur as a principal data scientist and dealing with production NLP models there.
I left there to finish writing my second book, which is software engineering for data scientists.
And now I'm self-employed doing a whole mix of things from developer relations contracting work through AI consultancy startups, some writing work, and also continuing my personal journey from data science towards software engineering.
So I don't even know whether I'd call myself a data scientist at the moment.
Yep, doing a whole mix of things.
I don't know what you would call it either.
but it sounds super interesting like
yeah one of the problems
with working at large companies is
you kind of get pigeonholed not just into one thing but one part of one thing you know
and it
sounds like you're
you get to explore a lot of the very exciting and rapidly changing parts of the
industry so super cool
definitely i'm i i'm not great at specializing in any particular one thing
And I used to see that as a downside, but now I see that as a huge strength to be able to
generalize and
pick up new things.
Yeah, absolutely.
And like I alluded to in the intro, before I was a data scientist, I was a geologist.
So I did an undergrad and PhD in geology.
I worked in the oil industry for a little bit and then transitioned to data science in 2015 when I was struggling to find good jobs in geology.
Machine learning, data science were just becoming a big thing.
There were a ton of good options for transitioning from one to the other.
So many good courses and so on.
So, yeah, I improved my Python programming.
I learned a bunch about machine learning and I made that jump into tech and it's just be it was
just a great move it's worked out it's I really really enjoy what I do
yeah oh that's fantastic
and you know one drawback less outside work right
yeah you don't get a you don't get to
go to
Greenland or wherever and yep
yep I do miss that but living in the Pacific Northwest I do get
outdoors a lot of the time.
Yeah, I know. I love it up here.
All
right, before we move on, really just one
quick logistical thing. Could you just move the
mic down just like a half
inch, just a tiny bit?
Yeah,
it's perfect.
Just picking up a little background noise.
All right.
This is the live version, folks.
We'll edit this out of the recording version.
Okay.
So,
let's talk, I guess, let's talk
PyCon first, okay?
Because
Yes. You just had your talk. Do you know this is up on YouTube yet? Have
you seen this?
I do. It just came up a couple of days ago.
Yeah, absolutely.
Such
a quick turnaround because when we're recording this late May, PyCon was finished 10 days ago, so super fresh.
Yeah, this is a lot better than previously because I think last year, maybe the year before, it was three or four months until
the talks came
out.
And it was like, we
talked to people, oh, it was a great talk, but we can't really share it with anyone who didn't already go to it, you know?
Yes.
So I saw your talk and I thought, oh, this sounds super interesting.
I want to talk to Catherine about it.
And I think there's a lot of interesting stories around it.
But before we get into the topic of what you're covering there, like, let's just talk PyCon.
How was the experience?
Oh, PyCon is the best.
it is just like one of the friendliest conferences I go to I was so happy to get a talk accepted this
time around um I had previously got a talk accepted in 2020 so I got the notification in
like February January February 2020 and I was like oh great I can't wait to stand up on stage
and meet all the people and then obviously it was all it was all virtual I sat in my
home office I recorded my talk so so nice to finally be able to have that experience
and it's just such a supportive environment everyone's very friendly um the questions that
I had at the end of the talk were were really good questions really positive and then a bunch
of people came up to me after the talk and they're like oh yeah i really enjoyed that and
just
that
kind of atmosphere you really don't get at every conference
no it's really different to do it in
person you
really get
a lot of a lot more it's a lot more gratifying to do it i think because you
can you can see the effect you have on people when you're
doing some
sort of zoom presentation or
podcast, you know, you're speaking to zero or one people in effect, right? And you don't realize
the reach it has, right? But yeah, that's great. What a weird time 2020 was, huh?
So weird. So weird. I'm
so glad that we're back to
meeting people in person and getting to go to
all the other talks at PyCon. And I think that for me, the advantage of it is I tend to go to a
there that I don't know very much about.
So I can just, there's such a huge range of things to learn about.
So everything from like what visualizations you can do in a browser with Python
to improvements that are being made right at the deep levels of the language,
like
improving
the speed and so on.
So, yeah.
Yeah, and just to be there with the people creating Python
and creating
the libraries and so on, you know,
seeing with the maintainers and the companies creating all
this stuff.
It's a super neat experience.
Yeah.
All right.
Also, let's talk about your books a bit.
Yes.
So this talk sort of comes from your newer book, right?
Absolutely, yes.
But maybe we'll – hey, 2020 is great.
Let's go back to 2020.
Yes.
Tell us about this one first.
Tell people about your books.
Mm-hmm.
So this first book is Building Machine Learning Pipelines
that I co-authored with Hannah's Hapke,
and we released that in 2020.
And it's all about how to build production machine learning systems
with TensorFlow.
So how you go from, you've done the experiments,
you have a working machine learning model.
How do you deploy that in a way that's standardized,
scalable, reproducible, and automated?
So it's based on TensorFlow Extended, which is a project from Google that helps you to basically one button, press one button, and then your machine learning model would import the data.
You check that the data was what you expect it to be, train that model, and then deploy it into production.
And at
the time we wrote this book, that was really the only technology that lets you do that.
Since then, there's a lot more have come along.
Like AWS has their own solution.
MLflow is a big one.
But 2020, this was a really new thing.
So we wanted to explain the principles of this.
Yeah, very neat.
Well, that's
the
thing with good ideas.
They catch on.
Yes, absolutely.
All right.
Okay, one more thing.
I gave you bad advice.
Move the mic up above your mouth, not below.
Okay.
I
apologize.
How's that?
Good.
Yeah, it's great.
Yeah.
So, okay.
That's book number one.
To be fair, I think TensorFlow is still a super important library, right?
It's
still relevant.
100%, yes.
Yeah, absolutely.
Okay.
On to software engineering for data scientists.
Tell us about this.
This is where this idea of this talk came from, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
the notebooks talk is an expansion of one of the chapters in this book. So software engineering for
data scientists is based on advice that I was giving my mentees in my previous job. And it's
also the book that I wanted to read when I was
transitioning into data
science myself.
So it tries to answer the questions like, what is a test? Why should I use one? How do I make
code more efficient what even is an api like all these things that i as a someone not coming from
any kind of software software engineering background was facing as i was transitioning
into a job in the tech industry
and it's
something that's often missed in data science intro courses
or degrees.
There is so much to learn in data science.
You go from data analysis, statistics, data visualization,
you pick up some SQL, you pick up machine learning.
It feels like this fire hose of dozens and dozens of things
you need to learn.
And then someone's like, oh, by the way,
you need to integrate this into a piece of software as well.
So I felt like this is a real pain point for a lot of people.
And there wasn't
anything that
really served them from, you know, when I started to read around about code quality, I'd very quickly get into examples in Java.
I'd be looking at web development examples.
There wasn't anything that I could relate to in my job.
So I decided to write it.
Cool.
Yeah, first you got to learn it yourself and then you got to
write it.
I think this is really, really valuable.
Thank you.
As much as we can do to help people come into the data science side and software side and just feel like they belong,
because it's so easy to just feel like you're banging your head against the wall.
You're like,
what do you mean dependencies are incompatible?
What do you mean?
Yes.
Like there's a Git merge conflict.
I didn't even want to use Git.
what is this horrible thing, right?
And just
battling against it.
So putting something out there
to sort of be the roadmap for people to follow.
It's great.
And I think even though the title is Data Scientists,
I think it will be useful
to a much broader set of people than that.
Because what I ended up writing,
it has some things that are specific to data science,
like how you write a test for machine learning.
But I could also have probably titled it
a friendly introduction to software engineering.
So like anyone who's not a software engineer
is their job title,
but wants to learn more about those principles
would probably benefit from it.
Yeah, cool.
I think a lot of that stuff's not really taught
in universities either.
I know there's computer science degrees, obviously,
but a lot of times it's more theoretical, right?
Yes.
And it doesn't really end
up with like,
this is how you do a pull request type of,
you know, conversations rather than,
He's how you implement a database in Lisp.
That's your
homework.
That's great.
That was my CS experience for my CS class.
Okay.
So let's talk notebooks.
And I think I want to start where you started with your talk,
in that before we talk about the challenges with notebooks,
things you need to do to move maybe beyond notebooks in certain circumstances,
how about we give some love to notebooks?
you talk
about
how great they are and how useful they are in the circumstances they're supposed to
be used right i
love notebooks for exploring for the very initial stages of a project particularly a
data-driven project where you want to you want to take a look at some data you want to
play around with it you you don't know exactly where you're going to end up with that project
at all you want the flexibility of being able to play and explore and notebooks are fantastic for
this because you you have that instant feedback from the code you're writing to what effect has
that had on the data and you can make whatever visualizations you want you can look at whatever
piece of data you feel like so they're fantastic for that initial stage where you don't know where
you're going to end up but you want you want to look around
yeah but but they do have some
challenges yes and that makes them difficult to reuse you know kind of like i opened i opened
this show with right like you've got all the stuff in in
one file potentially effectively
Jupyter notebooks in particular suffer from order of operations.
Yes.
Variability, right?
You can run them top to bottom, or you can kind of bump around.
I changed that cell and re-ran it, then I ran two more down.
I went down a ways and wrote a new one,
but something in the middle didn't take those changes, right?
Things like this.
They're a fantastic tool, but they're not the right tool for everything.
If you want something that you're going to run repeatedly
and in an automated fashion,
that's not what they're designed for.
People, there are sometimes moves to put notebooks in production,
and there's a few projects all about this,
like NB Dev is one.
I know that Netflix make a huge thing out of putting notebooks in production,
But I'm going to say I'm not a fan of that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
And I'm not either.
I think it's the right tool for the right job.
Yes.
You know?
And they just weren't designed for that.
There are some attempts to rethink how some of this goes.
Like, for example, I had the folks from Marimo on,
which it tries to resist being run out of order.
you can either set it up so you can't run stuff out of order
because it'll understand cell dependencies and rerun them if needed
or at least it'll show you
if you say that's going to be too slow
it'll at least show you stuff is stale and so on
so that's
cool
I think it's going to be interesting
but the truth is people are using Jupyter
almost entirely these
days
and I just learned about Marimo at PyCon
It sounds really cool.
I had a quick look into that.
I think
that's
a great option.
And another option is refactoring from a notebook into a regular Python script.
I agree.
I think that's the final skill, right?
And that lets you work more closely as a data scientist person, work more closely with software engineering and so on if you're integrating with a larger team.
rather
than like,
here's our notebook.
You guys figure out how to run it.
Like, oh, this is a new fancy notebook
that runs slightly better.
It's like, but still, how do I work with this again?
Right, but you kind of work more
the Python script level and so on.
Okay, so I want to maybe talk a bit about
what are some of the software engineering concepts
that you feel like data scientists
should be paying attention to?
Because, you know, you use the phrase, like, the firehose of information sort of thing.
And I think
when you're coming into this, you're like, well, okay, I realize I need to up my game to be a little more, you know, software side rigorous with things.
But I can't do everything.
I can't boil the ocean and learn all the advanced programming concepts and all the DevOps and all these things.
So what are the few things that people should really start paying attention to first?
so I think I'm going to break this down into tools that you want to be aware of
and
the
let's call it the mindset the strategies and the like how you want to think about things
I'll talk about the strategies first because that's going to inform the tools
so a lot of people in a in a data scientist role their their job is to explore and discover
and come up with new ideas test hypotheses so like oh what happens if we do this can we test
in what way will our users react if we change this thing?
But when you're moving more towards code
that's going to go into production,
that's going to be run and used repeatedly,
you've got to think about how to standardise that
and how to automate that,
how to make it efficient,
how to make it run well in a big system.
So that's a real change in mindset that you have to go through.
So software engineers have a ton of tools
that will help you write that code
that is more robust, more reproducible.
A huge one is learning how to test your code
to make sure that your code is doing what you want it to do.
learning to use version control so that you can share your code
so that other people can pick it up and use it.
Yeah, and also learning to refactor your code
and being happy with that process.
And obviously tests are going to play into this as well
so that you can be sure that when you change your code,
it didn't break something that you were relying on.
Yeah, I totally agree with that.
let's talk to those backwards
so
one challenge that I see
that
I think would be tricky
so I have this notebook
and it's
all just
top to bottom
immediate execution code
and I want to test it
it seems challenging to me
how do I run that
in a unit test
is a
unit test
even the right thing
if
your
notebook is carrying out many tasks in one go,
do you want to break out those tasks first
rather than test the whole thing in one go?
I think you almost have to
because
otherwise, how
do you test it enough
to make
sure?
I mean, I guess you could say, what's the final answer?
27, okay.
Long as we keep getting 27 for the final answer,
we can keep, you know,
that's not necessarily catching all the details there, right?
As long as there's only one way of getting to 27, then
you're fine.
Or it's a true or false at the end or something
like
that.
Buy the company, don't buy the company.
Not always the same.
So I guess that stepping back a bit,
then that means we need to break our code, break our notebook,
take the code within the notebook, and break it into pieces,
sort of assess what is going on there.
what
are the actual steps right
and in
your talk you're like here's you go through actually an
example with penguins right and you're like okay
what is
this notebook actually doing in its steps
because it's doing not just one thing it's doing like everything needed to get penguin classification
running right
yeah that's right i did a little example of um given the data sets predict the
penguin species and the notebook in that talk goes from downloading the data to cleaning the data
feature engineering for a machine learning model training that machine learning model
and then making a prediction on new code so that's like that you can really break down into those
steps and i i love just drawing diagrams and flow charts if i have a big complex notebook to figure
out what all the steps are and this is kind of this ends up being kind of backwards from what
you might do in an in the engineering world because there you probably start from knowing
what steps you're going to do and then writing the code accordingly
but
here in in the data world
you don't necessarily know what the outcome of your project is going to be
and a lot of projects will not produce a result
that you even want to use and deploy into production.
So you don't need to go through the process
of making well-engineered code
until you know that the project has legs,
it's going to go somewhere.
It's almost like the reverse.
You play around, you play around,
and it evolves, and you iterate,
and then you're like, okay, this.
Yes.
but as you point out in the talk it's it's not just a matter of going okay we'll take that and
we'll put that into functions it's like there might be parts that are irrelevant
or little
exploratory pieces that aren't actually germane to the thing you care about productizing
yes and
so
on right so you it's
kind of a an
assessment you have to go through right
you really have to
go away and take a step back and then come back and take a fresh look at your code and then
because you might have this like incredibly complex notebook but then you have to be like oh
what is this actually doing here how do i start to break that down so i think what i did in the
talk was i gave a checklist for how to do that so that that feels like a useful way to start
thinking about it to go from that amorphous massive code
to something that you can then factor into functions
and then start building that up.
And I like to go through and then just decide
what all the functions are going to be
based on that code in the notebook
before I actually transfer the code over.
And that helps me think through
what steps are going to be happening.
And then I think about the inputs
and the outputs of each of those functions
to make sure that the data is taking the correct journey,
that the types of the inputs and outputs are going to match,
that it's all going to work together as one bigger system.
I think one of the things that would make that easier
or a lot harder is how well-structured your notebook
is, right?
Are
you using little headers to say, here's what I'm doing in the next three cells?
And then another markdown header that says, okay, now we're cleaning the data and here's the various operations and why?
Or is it just lots of stuff or even maybe multiple things per cell, right?
Like
there's a lot of ways
in which good data science practices
will aid
you, prepare you for this process, right?
Absolutely.
And this kind of thing is also hugely useful if you're going to hand your notebook over to someone else at any point or if someone else is going to work on this notebook.
Just having that little bit of documentation to give those hints for what it's doing.
Yeah. The original vision, as I remember it being described for notebooks, is sort of literate programming
where the
code is like storytelling and then there's the code and describing what's happening. But I think in practice, a lot of people just use it as a scratch pad. You know what I mean?
Yep, yep.
And you'll definitely see that style of programming
if people are writing tutorials in notebooks
or they're deliberately setting them out as documentation.
And that works great.
That's another fantastic use for a notebook.
Yeah, it definitely does.
Okay, so what you're recommending is,
and what you just show in your talk,
is actually go and create a Python file,.py file,
And put
just stub functions in there for each thing,
each category of things or each step of things
that you've identified in the notebook.
And not actually move the code.
Just put pass.
If you want to confuse people, put triple dot, dot, dot, dot.
And that actually serves the same function.
Whatever, right?
Just leave them empty so that you get all that structure laid out.
And then when you're happy with it, start moving your code over.
Yes.
And this seems like a manual, time-consuming process.
It's like, why can't we automate this?
But I feel that going through that process really helps me change hats
from my exploratory hats to my production hats
so that I'm really thinking about what this code is going to do.
So I think baking that into your project plan
that you're going to spend the time to actually think through
what your code is going to do when it's run repeatedly
in a production setting is key to success here.
It is.
What do you think about multiple Python files
for different sections of the code or just one?
What's your rule of thumb there?
It's going to depend very much on the project for that.
If it's small and simple, one file seems fine.
If there's an obvious hierarchy, if there's some functions that are associated together,
then putting those into their own separate file seems helpful.
If there's helper functions that are going to get called in multiple places,
then breaking those out into their own separate Python file.
That seems like a good strategy.
Yeah, it definitely does.
I guess you want to keep in mind, well, what's the goal, right?
Is it
just to
make it something I can run in another,
in the context of, say, an API call?
Or are you trying to create a library that someone else can reuse this code
throughout different places, right?
That's probably part of the consideration.
Definitely, definitely.
What are your goals with this code?
Yeah.
Okay, so in your example, we talked about some of the tools, right?
You talked about, let's see, I guess it's worth pointing out,
this example you talked about, it's actually available on GitHub,
slides, code, and so on, so I'll link to that.
But you talked about two tools in particular to help do this conversion,
although it sounds to me like maybe you almost want to just manually do it,
but maybe one is a step towards another.
But you talked about NB Convert and Jupytext.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, tell us about these tools.
These are definitely helpful because they're very simple to use.
Install them and run them with just one line in the command line,
and then they will convert your Jupyter Notebook to a script
and strip out all the JSON that's in the back of the Notebook file.
So if you have a really simple Notebook
and you do just want to run the whole thing,
then you're pretty much done with these tools.
And that also helps you with the manual copying and pasting process that I'm talking about.
So they're a good halfway house between the notebook and refactored script.
Yeah, I feel like it might be easier to just export everything to a
Python
file.
At the top of it, write those stub functions.
And then go
and just move the pieces in rather than trying
to copy
out of cells.
Exactly.
and mark down sections and then, you know what I mean?
Like trying to reformat plus,
like this will get it into the destination format, I guess.
Yes.
And talking about copying and pasting,
it leads us on to talking about why you might want to write tests
at the same time as this.
Yeah.
You want to know that each of these new functions that you're making
is doing what you expect it to do.
So it's a pretty nice workflow to just write the unit tests for each of these functions at the same time as you're copying and pasting that code over.
And then you know when you've left a line behind.
Yeah.
You know, I'm going to go back a little bit on my earlier
statement.
I said I think it's really difficult to take this imperative immediate execution code from notebooks and test them.
but I think you could probably do something like put an assert cell into the notebook
right after the step you want to take.
So if you're
like, these three
cells are going to be basically this function,
just do
a B to put a cell below it,
and then write the assert that you would have in your unit test there,
and then move
them over to the test.
I think you could actually make that work.
Yeah, that's nice.
And that's also really helping you break things down into the steps
put into your functions because you're thinking about like here is a point where I want to
stop and see what's happened.
Yeah.
Yeah,
absolutely.
I suppose it's worth pointing out that NB convert is not just to get Python as an executable
script, but you can get markdown, restructured text, reveal JS for presentation, the LaTeX,
PDFs, like it's, this is just one of its features, but it's a tool that applies here, right?
Yes.
Yeah, absolutely.
And similar with Jupytext, but with that one, you can pair your notebook and your export so that when you update the notebook, the linked script also updates, which is really neat.
Yeah.
I see there's a certain type of comment, I guess, comment percent percent type of thing, which comes out of Jupytext.
Is
that understood by VS Code and PyCharm?
I feel like it is.
It almost treats those as cells or something.
I can't remember.
I think that
might actually give a little bit more hint to the editor.
I don't really necessarily want to derail us and try to play with it right now.
So what you can do is you talked about these paired notebooks.
So
in addition to just getting the Python script,
you can set it up to be paired.
So if you go into JupyterLab and say pair notebook with something,
then as the notebook changes,
it'll basically probably just overwrite the output.
Yep.
Python file, something like that.
Yeah, they sync with each other.
So the Python script updates when you update the notebook.
Okay.
I wonder if it goes the other way.
Yeah, I don't know.
That would be good, right?
Yeah.
Anyway, that's a super cool feature.
So if you're, I guess it only really applies
if you're willing to kind of live with that output, right?
You don't want to restructure
and completely change
the Python file,
but you're like, I just need this thing
to have a Python version.
Yes.
Yeah, exactly.
They're really neat tools that I wasn't aware of
until I started researching for this talk.
Yeah.
And they both are quite neat.
where do you see AI in this process?
Because I, you know what I mean?
Like you're
working, doing a lot of how do I build tools that use LLMs and
so on.
But a ton of the data science and software development space is like,
how do I use LLMs to write code for me?
So, for example, one of the things you show a lot of is here's your stub functions
and let's put some nice documentation for it and then write your code for it.
Could you, say, have some kind of copilot type thing?
Look at just the code you copy and go, document this for me.
Write me Python doc strings for this function or whatever.
Yeah, and I think that's, like with many LLM questions,
it's how do you know what to ask for
unless you've actually gone through that process yourself
and you know why it's valuable?
So if you're coming to this fresh
without having previous, well, like more engineering experience,
how do you know that you should ask it for documentation?
How do you know that doc strings exist?
And I think this can work if you're in the situation
where it's quite obvious what your documentation should be
and there's no caveats, there's no special cases
that you need to actually communicate to someone.
So
it's
definitely useful,
but it's also very easy to generate a lot of these things and then not go back
and actually check that it's communicating what you want it to.
Yeah. Yeah. I can just,
it's easy to have it just tell you how it's doing things instead of why,
or, you know, it's, it doesn't necessarily always get that right, but.
So it's, I would, for me, it's definitely,
a help but then I have to kind of force myself to go back and check that it is actually
the point that I want to make in this documentation or that it's test if I ask an LLM to write a test
for me is it actually testing what I care about in this function or is it just writing some
generic test that so that I can say well there's a test but it doesn't test anything that's actually
a useful input that's actually a potential thing that could go wrong with this code.
Yeah. And there's always the danger if you have the LLM write the code and the test together.
It'll just
make it so the tests pass, not necessarily so the tests are testing the thing
you care about, right?
You said the tests have
to pass, so now they pass. You didn't notice they
actually changed in a way that no longer validates what you care about.
Yeah. Just update the test
till it passes.
I do fear that this kind of stuff is going to create an expertise gap,
chasm or
whatever, where there's the people who were forced to do it because these tools didn't
exist will have this tribal knowledge of here's how you do this and here's why you do it. And a
lot of people who are in a hurry, especially, I'm not a programmer. I'll just have this tool help me
write the tests because I'm worried about the science or worried actually about the code or
whatever. And then five years down in your career, you're like, well, I've never actually written the
tests, you know, and I think it's going to be a challenge. It's not just a challenge for
programming or data science. It's a challenge for education. It's a challenge for so many
aspects of society. But, you know, while we're on the topic of data science.
Definitely. It's a huge challenge. How do you know what to ask it for if you haven't lived that process yourself?
And how do you know whether the answers are correct if you haven't gone through it yourself?
So, yeah, for more senior people, it's a hugely powerful tool and you can get a lot more done.
But how you gain that expertise, like you say, without going through that, that's a challenge.
It
is a challenge.
People often
make the analogy comparison of calculators and math. There's some similarities, but I think it's a different scale.
what I wonder
is if we might see
different interfaces to
LLMs that help with this
so just having chat is not
necessarily what we
want the best interface
for an LLM to write
code I've no idea what
I would love someone to invent
something that kind of
helps you review
and helps you
learn that process
but still have the increase in speed and productivity that you can get within LLM.
Yeah.
Well, whatever.
It's going to be an interesting time.
That's for sure, isn't it?
Yes.
It's going to be a very interesting time.
So another thing that strikes me as that there's going to be a tension here
has to do with what makes notebooks special in the first place, right?
Notebooks are about exploring data and sort of free form and just let me try this, let me try that.
Be an experimental and fluid.
And this process, while not completely removing that, does solidify it quite a bit.
We're down to these five steps.
It takes these arguments.
And maybe as an experienced software developer, you're ready to just refactor this code and keep working on it.
But I can see earlier stage people as being a challenge.
Like, well, now I can no longer just play with the data
and just I can't do like df.head and see what the heck it is.
Like, it's lost to me.
So what do you think about this tension between, you know,
the notebook freedom and the more rigorous software side of things?
I would see it as different phases of a data science project.
And not all data science projects will even make it to this stage.
So some, the exploratory process, that might give you your answers.
That might be your project is done while you're still in notebook land.
And in some situations, you'll hand over to a development team to go through the process of taking your code into a production environment.
So there's going to be – so depending on the makeup of the team and your exact job role, you might not – you're going to break out of this process at a different point.
Sure.
Okay.
I
think thinking about it in terms of a different phase of the project is useful.
So you go through the exploratory process
and you've done all that you need to do
of viewing the data, of exploring the data.
You know what is in your data set.
You're really familiar with it.
And then hopefully you can move to that stage
where you don't need to be looking at it
in quite the same way.
But you should also be using your tests
and your debugger to check that your data is what it needs to be
when you move to this next step.
But you probably need to do that less
because you've done that exploratory work to figure out what there is
and what you need to use in the final project.
I phrase it as a negative, like you're giving up the stuff.
I think maybe we should rethink about it as like a positive.
I was listening to you talk and I'm like,
well, when you get to this stage,
it's kind of like your project has succeeded.
Exactly.
In the sense
like you've done all you need to do,
now it's ready to put it to use.
Yes.
Let's put this in the hands of some users.
Let's put it on prime time.
Let's share it with different teams.
Yeah, exactly.
So
see it as a celebration,
not like I'm losing my freedom or whatever,
you know, to just keep exploring.
I think that's pretty cool.
Similar to maybe legacy code.
I know people lament, like, oh, I've got this thing,
and it's so badly written, and it's so convoluted,
but it's so important we have to still use it.
Like, well, that's also kind of like a success story,
even if it's a bit of a hassle in some of the ways.
Yeah, if your code has that much longevity,
it's clearly doing something right.
Exactly. Celebrate that.
Celebrate it.
Okay, let's talk DevOps, ML Ops a little bit.
What are your thoughts on later, right?
So I've written this code.
Maybe I've trained some models
or put in some algorithms in place.
How do you keep it working, keep it running, monitor it?
What are your thoughts around this?
I'm a big proponent of standardization.
So if your company has many machine learning models,
then picking some kind of standardized framework,
putting them into production is huge.
It's so easy to just have ad hoc code for each model
and then it becomes extremely hard to maintain.
You can't keep track of what many models are doing.
So picking one of the popular frameworks
and putting it into production is key here.
And those will come with things like validating your data
to make sure that your new training data has the same statistics as the old one.
You can set up automated analysis so that you know that
if your production model has dipped below some certain threshold,
you can trigger a retraining loop.
Being able to automate it and sort of step back from the manual process of training and deploying the model is huge here, I think.
Yeah, observability.
Yes.
And those sorts of things.
So when you say picking
one of the frameworks,
what frameworks
are we talking?
So TensorFlow Extended, MLflow, AWS, SageMaker.
There may well be others these days as well.
Okay. Yeah, something that comes with this all built in. So the ML ops side of things basically becomes operating TensorFlow Extended or operating SageMaker. And then if something goes wrong, then you can maybe go back to the data scientists
and
say, it looks like it's not relevant to the data that we're working with, right? Or something along those lines, right? It's drifted
or...
Yeah, yeah.
If it's sort of a simple, oh, our data has changed slightly,
then you can hopefully just trigger a retraining loop.
But then other times you might be like, oh, our customers have suddenly decided
to behave totally differently because of some external event.
We need to get back to the drawing board with this.
Or we've decided to add in a new feature.
This feature isn't quite what we wanted.
Let's change this up a bit.
But I think one of the biggest tools in the MLOps toolkit is just being, just remaining cynical about what your machine learning model is doing and expecting it to fail in unexpected ways and give examples, give answers that you have no idea that have failed in ways that you never even thought of.
It's going to keep happening.
Yeah.
What about understanding code running in Linux or in containers or stuff like that?
I can easily see a lot of folks coming from non-software backgrounds going, I already didn't know what the terminal was.
How am I supposed to work with containers inside of Linux machines or something like that?
Yeah, that's a great question.
I don't have an answer for you.
I'm just curious what your thoughts are, you know, because it's hard.
It is hard.
I don't know
for me personally
I assume that these things
are learnable
there's going
to be
you might have to play around with these things
and read three different types
of documentation before it starts to make sense
but there are a lot of
resources out there to get you from
not knowing how these things
work, them seeming like magic
to being able
to use them in the way that you want to.
Yeah.
Yeah, good advice.
I think I would say to folks something to the effect of
if you see other people who look like they understand this really well
and you're like, well, those people just know it.
And I'm always confused or whatever.
Almost all those people got there by taking little steps,
failing, reading the documentation, adding one more little skill.
Okay, now I can figure out what the size of files
over at SSH.
Okay, next.
And you just work your way through
little periods of frustration
until
you get there.
And it can look,
you look down the road at people who have made,
sort of made the whole transition
or they really understand that all well.
And it's like, well, how do they,
there's no way I can do that.
I just,
that's
beyond, it's not.
It's just, you gotta be willing
to take the little steps
and embrace the frustration
because on the other side is a new skill.
And I think if you are one of these people with that expertise,
then remembering that you didn't used to have that knowledge
and being open to answering the questions of people
who are just getting into that,
it would be great if more people would be able to remember that.
Yeah, I absolutely agree.
Don't say it's a dumb question.
There are no dumb
questions.
Yes, but remember that you had that same dumb question 10 years ago
or something like that, absolutely.
You talked about these different frameworks
and potentially others.
How do you pick?
Sometimes there's not even a choice
because your company is already using AWS
for storing the data.
Yeah, that's fair because you said, like,
if you're going to standardize on one,
if
they've already standardized,
like, well, you pick that one.
Yes. So that's probably the simplest way of choosing. But I think you've got to, it involves putting some thoughts into the project at the start and being like, okay, what's going to be the scope of our machine learning in this company?
are we expecting to have like 50 different models doing different things and but a lot of the time
it's you don't know this is going to be successful until you start doing it so
yeah you
get to a
situation where you already have a few models they're starting to become successful um then
you suddenly you need to transfer them all onto some framework.
I think sort of checking that they do all the things that are important in your use case.
So if you expect to be needing to retrain your model very frequently, then something
that makes that easy.
If it's really important that your model gives some specific answers in some specific case,
then good observability is very important.
Yeah, absolutely.
Okay, so I just, I'm a huge fan of awesome lists.
I'm kind of
a sucker for listicles in general, but awesome lists are cool.
So I just found an awesome ML Ops list.
And I'll put that in the show notes.
People can go around.
It looks really cool.
I mean, I just found it, so I don't know.
But I'll put that in there as a resource.
People can use that to start the research journey, I guess.
What do you think?
Yeah, definitely.
I'd also recommend the ML Ops community, which was a big Slack workspace
of people talking about all things
MRUps. It's a good place
to get into.
Yeah. Absolutely.
Okay.
I want to talk to you about one more thing.
Maybe.
No, I think that
might be it.
So,
yeah, we're getting near the end,
so I guess we should just wrap it up.
Did you want to give away a copy
of your book? We're trying tentatively,
maybe?
Yes, I will have
some e-book copies of software engineering for data scientists
to give away to listeners of this show.
I guess we'll put out the details with the
podcast.
Yeah, we'll figure it out.
And I'll put it in the show notes,
which will eventually find their way to the YouTube live stream
once I get that turned around.
But, yeah, if you want to get a free copy of the book,
I imagine there's limited copies,
so you'll have to act soon when you hear
this episode
come out.
But I'll put in some kind of instructions.
into the show notes and you can check that out.
Yeah, maybe we'll put the names into a hat
and pick out however many copies I'm able to give out.
Exactly.
So here's what I propose.
I think what we're going to do is we're going to create a notebook,
figure out how to pick all the names,
we're going to then productize it, put it into TensorFlow Extended,
train an LLM, and then we're going to let it pick the winners.
How's that sound?
That sounds
perfect.
Totally, totally easy.
I love it.
All right.
Well, let's close things out with maybe a little advice for people who are coming into the space.
They've been using notebooks for exploratory type of work generally.
What do you tell them to maybe take their notebooks to the next level or take their code out of notebooks into the Python to do the next thing?
Yeah, I think it's like, I think my message here is please share your code with other people,
share what your code can do with the world and make your code so that it is easy for other people
to use, so that it is robust, so that it's reproducible and just encouraging people to
put that time in to refactor and improve their codes because it is very worthwhile and it's not
as hard as you think it's going to be
no i i think that's great advice and i would just throw out also
that if you're not familiar with it if you've been working in notebooks a lot of times
the more software oriented editors are often very very good at algorithmically refactoring your code
You highlight a bet and go, make that a function, and it'll do it without making mistakes.
It might not be the result you ended up actually wanted, but it will do it without mistakes.
And so you can leverage some of these tools to sort of keep it to be, make it less error-prone.
Yeah, that's a great strategy and can prompt some ideas for how you might want to move from one to the other.
And you can accept those or you can be like, oh, no, actually, I wanted it to do this.
So, yeah, great starting point.
Control Z.
No, I don't want
that anymore.
I changed my mind.
That looks bad.
But at least you don't waste time on it.
All right.
Well, Catherine, thank you so much for being here, sharing your ideas.
I will link to your talk if people want to see the PyCon version as well.
So thanks for the excellent ideas.
Thanks for being here.
Thanks.
This has been a lot of fun.
Great conversation.
Yeah, bye-bye.
Bye.